3. Materials and Methods
The subsequent sections briefly discuss our research methods and the results from the analysis of the ten MLAs on four datasets.
3.1. Datasets
We identified four main clinical datasets: the Cleveland dataset, the Framingham Heart study dataset, the Faisalabad Institute dataset, and the South African Hearth dataset (Table 1). Each of them contains data on heart disease clinical instances. The Cleveland health disease dataset is an open-access dataset stored in the online repository of the University of California, Irvine (UCI). It is frequently used to perform search analyses of heart failure risk in patients, as it contains 303 patient records with no missing values. The Cleveland database contains 76 attributes, 13 of which are considered key. As Janosi et al. [29] point out, current experimental studies relying on the Cleveland dataset attempt to distinguish heart failure presence from heart failure absence. The Framingham Heart study dataset is an ongoing cohort study project being conducted in Framingham, Massachusetts. It is publicly accessible on the Kaggle website [30] and comprises 15 columns and around 4200 rows of data. Each row presents a person’s behavioral, demographic, and medical (history and current) data, while each column is a potential risk factor. The Faisalabad Institute dataset is based on 13 attributes and one class with records of 299 heart failure patients (105 women and 194 men) at the Faisalabad Institute of Cardiology and the Allied hospital in Faisalabad, Pakistan. The dataset is hosted on the Kaggle website for public consultation. Finally, the South African Hearth dataset consists of 462 records of patient data and contains 13 attributes to predict mortality from heart disease. The dataset is publicly accessible from the KEEL (Knowledge Extraction based on Evolutionary Learning) website [31].
Table 1. Review of Heart Disease Datasets.
Table
3.2. Machine Learning Classifiers
Our study revolves around the binary prediction and identification of main CVD risk factors. We used ten different classifying procedures from the diverse areas of ML (Table 2). The classifiers comprise a linear statistical approach (linear Regression [32]), three tree-based methods (Random Forest [33], XGBRF [34], and decision tree [35]), one SVM [36], one instance-based learning model [37], and four ensemble boosting methods (Gradient Boosting [38], LightGBM [39], CatBoost [40], and AdaBoost [41]). We measured the performance of each classifier algorithm independently. Then, we properly recorded all the results for further analysis.
Table 2. Review of Machine Learning Classifiers.
Table
3.3. Methodology
Several authors propose methodologies such as [5,8,9,10,12,20]. Our proposal is based on some of these models. We followed a six-staged methodology to evaluate the performance of the ten MLAs on the clinical datasets and thus identify the main CVD risk factors (Figure 1). The six stages are as follows: (1) Load data dataset, (2) Pre-process data, (3) Select attributes, (4) Run ML models, (5) Apply evaluation metrics, and (6) Process MLA/classifier performance results.
Mathematics 09 02537 g001 550
Figure 1. Methodology for the evaluation of CVD datasets.
Each methodology stage can be described as follows:
Load data dataset. Select and load data from the dataset containing clinical records of patients with CVDs.
Pre-process dataset. Review loaded data to understand their content. Then, select the classification variable to obtain the best results.
Select attribute or main risk factors. Use Random Forest to select the top-two and top-four attributes from each dataset. Split data for training and testing (i.e., 70% for training and 30% for testing), and k = 10. Similarly, calculate the best parameters for RandomizedSearchCV for n_estimators, max_attributes, and max_depth. Most of the algorithms have these parameters in common, except for K-nearest neighbor and MLP. Parameter ramdom_state was set to 42 in all the evaluations.
Run ML classifiers: Apply the ten ML classifiers to discern participants with CVD from healthy individuals.
Apply evaluation metrics. Analyze MLA classification performance with respect to five criteria: accuracy, precision, recall, f1-score, and area under the curve (ROC-AUC).
Process performance results. Gather and compare performance values from the ten MLAs and record such results for further analysis. Then, choose the best-performing MLA or classifier.
3.4. Validation of the Classification Method
We analyzed the performance of the ten ML classifiers or MLAs with the help of the train-test split technique and k-fold cross-validation (k = 10) to identify top-two and top-four main attributes in public datasets [42,43]. Classifier performance was analyzed with respect to five performance evaluation metrics: accuracy, precision, recall, f1-score, and ROC-AUC. The train-test split technique [44] is a simple and agile procedure that is adaptable to large datasets. It can be used to assess MLA performance by splitting a given dataset into training and testing sets. Hence, a given model is trained using the training set, and then the model is applied to the test set. Cross-validation [44] is also used to calculate MLA performance, as it ensures less variance than a single split of the training and test sets. Cross-validation means segmenting the dataset into k-parts, e.g., k = 3, k = 5 and k = 10. After performing the cross-validation, k different performance scores are obtained, which can be synthesized through a mean and standard deviation. The result is a better approximation of the algorithm’s performance on the new data. This technique is usually more reliable than the train-test split method as algorithms are trained and evaluated several times on different data. The choice of k should allow the test partition size to be large enough to construct a reasonable sample; hence, k values of 3, 5, and 10 are common